.TH DOT 1 "May 2026" "dotfiles v0.2.507" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dot \- dotfiles management CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dot
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dot
is the control plane for a chezmoi-managed dotfiles system. It provides
commands for applying configuration, diagnostics, repair, security, and
AI-assisted development workflows.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Core
.TP
.B apply
Converge the machine onto the tracked configuration.
.TP
.B update
Pull the latest state and pre-warm slow paths.
.TP
.B sync
Alias for apply.
.TP
.B diff
Show chezmoi diff with exclusions.
.TP
.B status
Show configuration drift.
.TP
.B add \fIfile\fR
Add a file to chezmoi source.
.TP
.B remove \fIfile\fR
Safely remove a managed file.
.TP
.B edit
Open chezmoi source in $EDITOR.
.TP
.B cd
Print source directory path.
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.B doctor
Audit tools, paths, portability, and security posture.
.TP
.B health
Run health dashboard.
.TP
.B heal
Auto-repair tools, chezmoi drift, broken symlinks, and missing files.
.TP
.B smoke\-test
Exercise critical toolchains and integrations.
.TP
.B benchmark
Run shell startup performance benchmarks.
.TP
.B score
Compute overall system health score.
.SS Recovery
.TP
.B rollback
Manage backups and rollback to previous states.
.TP
.B bundle
Produce a portable support or recovery archive.
.TP
.B snapshot
Create a baseline snapshot.
.SS Security
.TP
.B attest
Export machine-readable workstation evidence.
.TP
.B secrets \fIsubcommand\fR
Manage encrypted secrets (load, edit, provider).
.TP
.B mcp
MCP policy validation and server management.
.SS AI
.TP
.B ai
Open the AI fleet cockpit (TUI). With a prompt, run a one-shot on Claude
(\fBdot ai "fix the bug"\fR); with a tool name, run it on that tool
(\fBdot ai codex "..."\fR).
.TP
.B ai chat
Open an interactive session with a fleet tool.
.TP
.B ai tools, ai install
Show, install, and manage the AI CLI fleet.
.TP
.B ai serve
Run a local Claude gateway and route the non-Claude fleet through it,
serving your Claude subscription over the Anthropic and OpenAI protocols.
.TP
.B ai cost, ai doctor, ai login
Spend report, fleet/gateway health check, and tool authentication.
.TP
.B \-\-style <name>
Steer any prompt with a context pattern (architect, hardener, refactor).
.TP
.B cl, codex, copilot, goose, crush, amp, cursor-agent, grok, agy, kiro, sgpt, ollama, opencode, aider, autohand, vibe, qwen, zai
Deprecated bridge aliases for \fBdot ai <tool>\fR; each still works and
prints a hint.
.TP
.B ai\-setup, ai\-query
Deprecated aliases for \fBdot ai login\fR and \fBdot ai ask\fR.
.SS Tools
.TP
.B env
Inspect or modify environment variables.
.TP
.B profile
Show or switch active profile.
.TP
.B prewarm
Regenerate shell caches for fast startup.
.TP
.B clean\-cache
Clear shell initialization caches.
.TP
.B learn
Interactive tour of dotfiles features.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DOTFILES_FAST=1
Skip heavy layers (zinit, completions) for fast startup.
.TP
.B DOTFILES_ULTRA_FAST=1
Bare minimum shell (aliases + prompt only).
.TP
.B DOTFILES_AI=1
Enable AI helper scripts.
.TP
.B DOTFILES_NONINTERACTIVE=1
Force non-interactive mode (for CI/scripts).
.TP
.B DOTFILES_PREWARM_ON_APPLY=1
Auto-prewarm caches after dot apply (default: enabled).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.dotfiles/
Repository root (chezmoi source).
.TP
.I ~/.config/chezmoi/chezmoi.toml
Per-machine overrides.
.TP
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/commands/
User-provided custom dot commands.
.TP
.I ~/.config/dotfiles/modules.d/
User-provided aliases and functions.
.TP
.I ~/.config/zsh/rc.d.local/
User-provided zsh initialization scripts.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chezmoi (1),
.BR mise (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Sebastien Rousseau <sebastian.rousseau@gmail.com>
.SH BUGS
Report issues at https://github.com/sebastienrousseau/dotfiles/issues
